FOODFACTSFrom the U.S. Food and Drug Administration       Raw Produce
Selecting and Serving it Safely Grouping of fresh produce photo.As you enjoy fresh produce, follow these safe handling tips to help protect yourself and your family.Fruits and vegetables are an important part of a healthy diet. 
Your local markets carry a wide variety of nutritious fresh fruits 
and vegetables. However, harmful bacteria that may be in the 
soil or water where produce grows can come in contact with 
fruits and vegetables and contaminate them. Fresh produce may 
also become contaminated after it is harvested, such as during 
storage or preparation. Eating contaminated produce can lead to foodborne illness, often called “food poisoning.” So as you enjoy fresh produce, follow 
these safe handling tips to help protect yourself and your family.Buy Right Hand holding fruit in grocery store photo.You can help keep produce safe 
by making wise buying decisions. •	Choose produce that is not bruised 
or damaged. •	When buying pre-cut, bagged or 
packaged produce — such as half 
of a watermelon or bagged salad 
greens — choose only those items 
that are refrigerated or surrounded by ice. •	Bag fresh fruits and vegetables separately from raw meat, 
poultry, and seafood when packing them to take home from 
the market. Store Properly  Produce in refererator with thermometer readin 40 degrees photo.Proper storage of fresh produce 
can affect both quality and safety.•	Store perishable fresh fruits and 
vegetables (like strawberries, lettuce, 
herbs, and mushrooms) in a clean 
refrigerator at a temperature of 
40° F or below. Use a refrigerator 
thermometer to check! If you’re not 
sure whether an item should be 
refrigerated to keep its quality, ask your grocer. •	Refrigerate all produce that is purchased pre-cut or packaged.Separate for Safety   Seperate meat and vegetables on cutting boards photo.Keep fruits and vegetables that will be eaten raw separate from raw meat, poultry, and seafood — and from kitchen utensils used for 
those products.  •	Wash cutting boards, dishes, utensils, and countertops with soap and hot water between preparing raw meat, poultry, and seafood and preparing produce that will not be cooked. •	If possible, use one cutting board for fresh produce and a separate one for raw meat, poultry, and seafood.•	If you use plastic or other non-porous cutting boards, run them through the dishwasher after use.Prepare Safely    Hands washing produce in running sink water.When preparing any fresh produce, begin with clean hands. Wash your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and warm water before and after preparation. •	Cut away any damaged or bruised areas on fresh fruits and vegetables before preparing and/or eating. Throw away any produce that looks rotten. •	Wash all produce thoroughly under running water before preparing and/or eating, including produce grown at home or bought from a grocery store or farmers’ market. Washing fruits and vegetables with soap, detergent, or 
commercial produce wash is not recommended. •	Even if you do not plan to eat the skin, it is still important to wash produce 
first so dirt and bacteria are not transferred from the surface when peeling 
or cutting produce. •	Scrub firm produce, such as melons and cucumbers, with a clean 
produce brush. •	After washing, dry produce with a clean cloth towel or paper towel to further reduce bacteria that may be present on the surface.What About Pre-Washed Produce?Many pre-cut, bagged, or packaged produce items are pre-washed and ready-to-eat. If so, it will be stated on the packaging, and you can use the produce without further washing. If you choose to wash produce marked as “pre-washed” or 
“ready-to-eat,” be sure that it does not come in contact with unclean surfaces or utensils. This will help to avoid cross contamination.Pre-washed saled bag photo.Sprouts on a sndwich photo.Sprouts: What You Should KnowLike any fresh produce that is consumed raw or lightly cooked, sprouts that are served on salads, wraps, sandwiches, and in some Asian food may contain bacteria that can cause foodborne illness. But unlike other fresh produce, sprouts are grown from seeds and beans under warm and humid conditions. These conditions are also ideal for the growth of bacteria, including Salmonella, Listeria, and E. coli. If just a few harmful bacteria are present in or on the seed, the bacteria can grow to high levels during sprouting, even if you are growing your own sprouts under sanitary conditions at home.Children, older adults, pregnant women, and people with weakened immune systems 
(such as transplant patients and individuals with HIV/AIDS, cancer, or diabetes) should avoid eating raw or lightly cooked sprouts of any kind (including onion, alfalfa, clover, radish, and mung bean sprouts). When eating out, you can ask that raw sprouts not be added to your food. If you purchase a sandwich or salad at a restaurant or delicatessen, check to make sure that raw sprouts have not been added.What can consumers do to reduce the risk of illness if they want to eat sprouts? •	Wash sprouts thoroughly under running water before eating or cooking. Washing may reduce bacteria that may be present, but it will not eliminate it.•	Cook sprouts thoroughly. Cooking kills harmful bacteria and reduces the risk of illness. About Foodborne Illness Know the SymptomsConsuming dangerous foodborne bacteria will usually cause illness within 1 to 3 days of eating the contaminated food. However, sickness can also occur within 20 minutes or up to 6 weeks 
later. Although most people will recover from a foodborne illness within a short period of time, some can develop chronic, severe, or even life-threatening health problems.Foodborne illness can sometimes be confused with other illnesses that have similar symptoms. 
The symptoms of foodborne illness can include: •	Vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain •	Flu-like symptoms, such as fever, headache, and body ache Take ActionIf you think that you or a family member has a foodborne illness, contact your healthcare provider immediately. Also, report the suspected foodborne illness to FDA in either of these ways: •	Contact the Consumer Complaint Coordinator in your area. Locate a coordinator here: 
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/ReportaProblem/ConsumerComplaintCoordinators •	Contact MedWatch, FDA’s Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program: 
By Phone: 1-800-FDA-1088 
Online: File a voluntary report at http://www.fda.gov/medwatch Safe Food Handling: Four Simple StepsClean Separate Cook Chill 4C icons. CLEAN 
Wash hands and surfaces often	Wash your hands with warm water and soap for at least 
20 seconds before and after handling food and after 
using the bathroom, changing diapers, and handling pets.	Wash your cutting boards, dishes, utensils, and counter tops with hot soapy water after preparing each food item.	Consider using paper towels to clean up kitchen 
surfaces. If you use cloth towels, launder them often in the hot cycle.	Rinse fresh fruits and vegetables under running tap 
water, including those with skins and rinds that are not 
eaten. Scrub firm produce with a clean produce brush.	With canned goods, remember to clean lids before 
opening.SEPARATE 
Separate raw meats from other foods Separate raw meat, poultry, seafood, and 
eggs from other foods in your grocery 
shopping cart, grocery bags, and refrigerator. Use one cutting board for fresh produce 
and a separate one for raw meat, poultry, 
and seafood. Never place cooked food on a plate that 
previously held raw meat, poultry, seafood, 
or eggs unless the plate has been washed in 
hot, soapy water. Don’t reuse marinades used on raw foods 
unless you bring them to a boil first.COOK 
Cook to the right temperature	Color and texture are unreliable indicators of safety. 
Using a food thermometer is the only way to ensure the safety of meat, poultry, seafood, and egg products for 
all cooking methods. These foods must be cooked to 
a safe minimum internal temperature to destroy any 
harmful bacteria.	Cook eggs until the yolk and white are firm. Only use recipes in which eggs are cooked or heated thoroughly.	When cooking in a microwave oven, cover food, stir, 
and rotate for even cooking. If there is no turntable, rotate the dish by hand once or twice during cooking. Always allow standing time, which completes the 
cooking, before checking the internal temperature with 
a food thermometer. 	Bring sauces, soups and gravy to a boil when reheating.CHILL 
Refrigerate foods promptly	Use an appliance thermometer to be sure the 
temperature is consistently 40° F or below and 
the freezer temperature is 0° F or below.	Refrigerate or freeze meat, poultry, eggs, seafood, 
and other perishables within 2 hours of cooking 
or purchasing. Refrigerate within 1 hour if the 
temperature outside is above 90° F.	Never thaw food at room temperature, such as on the counter top. There are three safe ways to defrost food: in the refrigerator, in cold water, and 
in the microwave. Food thawed in cold water or in the microwave should be cooked immediately.	Always marinate food in the refrigerator.	Divide large amounts of leftovers into shallow 
containers for quicker cooling in the refrigerator.November 2015For more information, contact the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition’s Food and Cosmetic 
Information Center at 1-888-SAFEFOOD (toll free), Monday through Friday 10 AM to 4 PM ET (except Thursdays from 12 PM to 1 PM ET 
and Federal Holidays). Or, visit the FDA website at http://www.fda.gov/educationresourcelibrary