Alcohol abuse is a serious public health concern.  Did you know that alcohol can harm a fetus at any point in its development,often before a woman knows she’s pregnant?“Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders” (FASD) is an umbrella term describing the range of effects thatcan occur in an individual whose mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. These effects may includephysical, mental, behavioral, and/or learning disabilities with lifelong implications. The term FASDis not intended for use as a clinical diagnosis. It refers to conditions such as fetal alcohol syndrome(FAS), alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND), and alcohol-related birth defects(ARBD).If women do not drink alcohol during pregnancy, FASD is 100 percent preventable. The SurgeonGeneral issued an advisory in February 2005 to help share this important message and to urge healthprofessionals to identify and assist women who are drinking or at risk of drinking during pregnancy.WHO IS AT RISK?Any pregnant woman who drinks alcohol is at risk of havinga child with an FASD, regardless of her education, income,or ethnicity. Women who are at particularly high risk ofdrinking during pregnancy and having a child with an FASDinclude:•Women with substance abuse or mental health problems•Women who have already had a child with an FASD1,2•Recent drug users•Smokers•Women who have multiple sex partners•Recent victims of abuse and violenceAlcohol is a potent teratogen, a substance that can damagea developing fetus. There is no known safe level of alcoholuse during pregnancy, so pregnant women or women whomay become pregnant should not drink any alcohol fromconception to birth.TREATMENT FOR WOMENMany women who need alcohol treatment may not receiveit due to lack of money or child care, fear of losing custodyof their children, or other barriers. For successful recovery,women often need a continuum of care for an extendedperiod of time, including:•Comprehensive inpatient or outpatient treatment foralcohol and other drugs•Case management•Counseling and other mental health treatment•Medical and prenatal care•Child care•Transportation•Followup pediatric and early intervention services forchildren•Services that respond to women’s needs regardingreproductive health, sexuality, relationships, andvictimizationPREVENTING FASD: HEALTHY WOMEN, HEALTHY BABIESFASD Center logo and a line image of a pregnant woman with her hands on her bellywhat you need to knowSurgeon General’s Advisory on Alcohol Use in Pregnancy •A pregnant woman should not drink alcohol during pregnancy. •A pregnant woman who has already consumed alcohol during her pregnancy should stop in order to minimize further risk. •A woman who is considering becoming pregnant should abstain from alcohol. •Recognizing that nearly half of all births in the United States are unplanned, women of childbearing age should consult their physician and take steps to reduce the possibility of prenatal alcohol exposure. •Health professionals should inquire routinely about alcohol consumption by women of childbearing age, inform them of the risks of alcohol consumption during pregnancy, and advise them not to drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy. —Surgeon General Richard Carmona,  February 2005 SAMHSA LogoSAMHSA FASD Center for Excellence logos and contact information•Other support services, such as housing, education andalcohol use during pregnancy. Primary care providers, suchjob training, financial support services, parenting education,as obstetricians/gynecologists and family doctors, play a keylegal services, and aftercare3role in preventing FASD. They should:Research shows that residential substance abuse treatment•Talk to their patients about the dangers of drinking alcoholdesigned specifically for pregnant women and women withduring pregnancychildren can have substantial benefits in terms of recovery,•Identify women who are at risk by using screeningpregnancy outcomes, parenting skills, and women’s ability totools such as T-ACE and TWEAK, which askmaintain or regain custody of their children.4specific questions about drinking habits7,8T W T P FASD•Refer to treatment and other support servicesHREEAYSOREVENTwomen with drinking problems, pregnant womenThere are three main approaches to preventing FASD:5who drink, and women who are at risk of an alcohol-•Increase public knowledge about FASD through generalexposed pregnancyeducation, public service announcements, media attention,A woman’s partner, other family members, and friends canalcohol warning labels, posters, pamphlets, and billboards.also help prevent FASD by:•Target women at risk by screening pregnant women and•Sharing information with her about FASD and thewomen of childbearing age for alcohol use, and by providingimportance of not drinking during pregnancyinterventions with pregnant women who drink and with•Modeling safe behavior by not drinking themselveswomen who drink and do not use birth control. Brief•Encouraging her to talk about problems in her life thatinterventions such as motivational interviewing may bemay lead her to drinkeffective at reducing risk.6Target women at highest risk through treatment of alcohol••Helping her find treatment if she cannot stop drinkingproblems and strategies to encourage pregnancy prevention.CONCLUSIONWomen at risk include those who abuse alcohol whileDrinking during pregnancy can cause permanent damage topregnant or who are at risk of becoming pregnant, particularlya fetus. However, FASD is 100 percent preventable. The onlywomen who have already given birth to a child withcause of FASD is prenatal exposure to alcohol. If a woman doesan FASD.not drink alcohol while she is pregnant, her baby will not haveAll three strategies are important, but targeting women atan FASD. Health care providers, families, friends, and otherincreased or highest risk may be more effective in reducingcommunity members all have a role in addressing FASD.REFERENCES1. Project CHOICES Research Group. 2002. Alcohol-exposed pregnancy:  Characteristics associated with risk. American Journal of PreventiveMedicine 23(3):166–173.2. Astley, S.J.; Bailey, D.; Talbot, C.; et al. 2000. Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) primary prevention through FAS diagnosis:  I. Identification of high-risk birth mothers through the diagnosis of their children. Alcohol and Alcoholism 35(5):499–508.http://alcalc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/35/5/499?ijkey=c42ab8b64760a79a7445ab6ef918dc01a3c78acb3. Astley, S.J.; Bailey, D.; Talbot, C.; et al. 2000. Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) primary prevention through FAS diagnosis: II. A comprehensiveprofile of 80 birth mothers of children with FAS. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 35(5):509–519.4. Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. 2001. Benefits of Residential Substance Abuse Treatment for Pregnant and Parenting Women: Highlightsfrom a Study of 50 Demonstration Programs of the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Rockville, MD: SAMHSA.5. Stratton, K.; Howe, C.; and Battaglia, F., eds. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome:  Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment. Washington, DC:  National AcademyPress, 1996.6. Handmaker, N.S.; Miller, W.R.; and Manicke, M. 1999. Findings of a pilot study of motivational interviewing with pregnant drinkers. Journalof Studies on Alcohol 60(2):285–287.7. Alvik, A.; Haldorsen, T.; and Lindemann, R. 2005. Consistency of reported alcohol use by pregnant women:  Anonymous versus confidentialquestionnaires with item nonresponse differences. Alcoholism:  Clinical and Experimental Research 29(8):1444–1449.8.Moraes, C.L.; Viellas, E.F.; and Reichenheim, M.E. 2005. Assessing alcohol misuse during pregnancy:  Evaluating psychometric properties ofthe CAGE, T-ACE and TWEAK in a Brazilian setting. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 66(2):165-173.