The information you have accessed or received is provided "as is" for informational purposes only. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) does not provide any warranties of any kind regarding this information. In no event shall the United States Government or its contractors or subcontractors be liable for any damages, including but not limited to, direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, arising out of, resulting from, or in any way connected with this information, whether or not based upon warranty, contract, tort, or otherwise, whether or not arising out of negligence, and whether or not injury was sustained from, or arose out of the results of, or reliance upon the information.
 The display of the DHS official seal or other DHS visual identities, including the US-CERT, ICS-CERT, or Critical Infrastructure Cyber Community (C3) Voluntary Program name or logo shall not be interpreted to provide any person or organization the authorization to use the official seal, insignia or other visual identities of the Department of Homeland Security, including US-CERT, ICS-CERT, and the C3 Voluntary Program. The DHS seal, insignia, or other visual identities shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by DHS, US-CERT, ICS-CERT, the C3 Voluntary Program, or the United States Government. Use of the DHS seal without proper authorization violates federal law (e.g., 18 U.S.C.  506, 701, 1017), and is against DHS policies governing usage of its seal.
 All content on this website or received via email distribution through this website is Traffic Light Protocol (TLP): WHITE. Recipients may share TLP: WHITE information without restriction, subject to copyright controls. For more information on the TLP, see website DHS does not endorse any commercial product or service, including any subjects of analysis. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by DHS. 