A free antivirus program you may use on your computer or mobile device
 Avast Free Antivirus 2017 offers protection against malware and viruses without slowing down your computer. You may use it for private use, your mobile device, small business or large business purposes. Instead of processing and analyzing using your computer and processor power, the hard work is done on the cloud instead of on your device.
 Trapping and catching malware before it does any damage
 Avast Free Antivirus 2017 is an antivirus program that you download and install on your device. It undertakes vital scanning processes on your device while using your device's CPU (Central Processing Unit). Scan analysis is done via the cloud, and there is a cyber capture function that records unknown files, sends them to Avast, and figures if out they are a threat or not
 What features and benefits does this antivirus software have?
 Protection from viruses and malware is the main goal of Avast Free Antivirus 2017, plus with CyberCapture, it examines your unknown files to find out if they are threats or not. The software has numerous micro-updates through the day as the Avast company updates its malware and virus database. The 2017 version is faster because it doesn't rely as heavily on your device's processor as previous versions did. It is more lightweight and streamlined. The software has a behavior shield that monitors your apps and programs in real time and the antivirus is triggered if a program or app begins to act suspiciously. You may scan your device using Avast's powerful features and scans, and it will not conflict with your other anti-virus software. You may also take advantage of their software updater, which notifies you which of your programs are out of date, so that you may update them, which makes them less vulnerable. Avast also has a Wi-Fi inspector features that helps weed out the unsafe Wi-Fi networks from the safe ones.
 Easy to use and tricky to learn
 Getting the hang of what each function does and how the tools are used is a little tricky, but once you have learned how to do it, you will easily be able to trigger the functions and settings you desire. Avast Free Antivirus 2017 is compatible with Windows 10, though the interface isn't modeled on it. Nevertheless, people who are computer literate will find Avast easy and intuitive to use. From a single Avast account, you may control all of your device's protection, and their smart-scan technology helps you tune up and speed up your computer or device with just a few clicks and default settings. One of the less obvious user-interface features is the program's ability to hold back notifications and other interruptions while games are playing. With Avast passwords, you are able to auto-fill out all your login information because it is a powerful password manager, which means you do not have to remember your passwords anymore.
 Current Avast users should update and new users should consider it
 If you are currently an Avast user, then there is no excuse for not downloading and installing the newest 2017 version because it is far faster, lighter and more efficient than previous generations of the software. If you have never tried Avast before, then you may rest assured that it will not conflict with your current paid or free anti-malware and antivirus software. There are versions suitable for different needs, such as for personal, business or large business, and the software has different subscription levels where each tier adds yet more features. If you are looking for anti-malware and antivirus software, then Avast's 2017 version is a strong contender. 