Antivirus is a program that detects and prevents your PC or laptop from malicious programs or malware that are often referred to as a virus. It is recommended to install and use relevant and genuine antivirus in your PC or laptop in order to prevent it from any kind of virus attack that can cause permanent damage to your machine. Before installing the antivirus on your laptop or PC, you need to first understand what kind of malware that you want to block. The modern day antivirus software are well equipped to combat multiple malware programs  especially which are spread via the internet. This article reviews some of the important and effective antivirus software that you can download or buy for securing your PC and laptop. Both paid and free antivirus software are available. The level of security of paid antivirus is quite high compared to the ones that are available for free in the market. The choice is yours.
 Avast Antivirus
 Avast is one of the most trusted names in the genre of free antivirus available in the market. More than 220 million people have chosen this antivirus to keep their PC safe online. Recently the security system has celebrated its 100 millionth download of its mobile security and antivirus worldwide.
 Norton Antivirus
 Norton antivirus from Symantec is one of the most popular antiviruses that are used all over the world. Many corporates placed their trust on this popular security software. This is a patented antivirus that protects your PC from any kind of online and offline threats. This antivirus offers social networking protection and 24/7 support.
 McAfee Antivirus
 It offers antivirus security for home usage, home offices and also large organizations. The company offers a range of security technology including Data Center Security, Database Security, Endpoint Protection, Mobile Security and much more. It delivers proactive and proven solutions and services in order to keep your systems safe and secure.
 Eset Antivirus
 This antivirus is available both for home as well for business. Their fast and award-winning antivirus software give you peace of mind while surfing the internet. The evasive threats and exploitation of browser and application are protected when you use Eset antivirus in your computers. The Social Media Scanner helps to protect your Facebook and Twitter accounts.
 TrendMicro Antivirus
 You can secure your home PC as well as your business data by using the TrendMicro antivirus. This antivirus is smart, simple and secure that fits all your security requirements. This antivirus offers smart protection for your PC and is simple to use. It also offers mobile security and it does not slow down the processing of your machine.
 Bitdefender Antivirus
 This antivirus is regarded as one click antivirus because of its feature of removing the virus from your PC in just one click. This antivirus is simple yet powerful. It offers both total and internet security antivirus software for your PC that comes with loads of features and specifications for optimized security.
 Webroot Antivirus
 This is the numero uno brand name in the US in the field of internet security. The latest antivirus software has the capability to combat not only against viruses but also against spyware and phishing attacks. It protects your PC from unsafe websites and also protects your identity and social network thefts.
 Avira Antivirus
 Avira offers free and paid antivirus software ranges for both Mac and PC. The software maker uses the same award-winning technology for building both free and premium antivirus software. The antivirus helps you keep your PC malware-free. The antivirus is light yet powerful and simple and easy to use.
 Kaspersky Antivirus
 This popular antivirus software offers security against computer viruses, Trojans, spyware, rootkits and many others. The best part is this antivirus does not undermine the performance of your PC. Your PC will respond as fast it used to before installation of Kaspersky antivirus. The heuristic scanner rapidly reacts to the new and emerging threats as well.
 F-Secure Antivirus
 This antivirus is always up-to-date and offers high-end protection against malware. This software instantly responds against any kind of threats and stops intrusions. It does not slow down your PC and this antivirus is easy to install and simple to use. This software offers advanced protection for your PC against any kind of online threat.
 AVG Antivirus
 The AVG antivirus is available for your PC, Mac, Tablet and also mobile. Their award-winning antivirus software is a must have for any kind of device that you want to protect. The best part is it is a free antivirus and offers the range of service that equals any paid antivirus software.
 Bullguard Antivirus
 Bullguard Antivirus
 The Bullguard internet security comes with a 60-day free trial offer that you can use for protecting your PC. Its simple interface has a low impact on the system resources. This antivirus offers the best protection against malware. The antivirus auto scans your PC for cleaning purpose and makes your PC virus-free.
 G Data Antivirus
 The G Data antivirus is not just an antivirus that only protects your PC from viruses, Trojans, spyware and malware but also offers some extra features like encryption of your personal data and reliable device control. This antivirus protects your system from every other threat that the online transaction can pose for you.
 Panda Security Antivirus
 If you have Panda Security antivirus on your computer your computer is safe from any kind of viruses. This software also safeguards your from any kind of online fraud and prevent data theft from your computer. This also offers your to backup your valuable data. You can download the free trial to test the effectiveness of it.
 Norman Antivirus
 This is an effective antivirus that protects your PC from any kind of malicious software. The new interface of the software is easy to navigate and it contains smart default settings. The latest version of the software has a simple user interface and offers better protection by its blocking and cleaning tools.
 EScan Antivirus
 eScan antivirus and internet security suites are designed and developed to support home, small office setups and also for large enterprises. This software offers comprehensive antivirus and content security solutions that protect your machine from any kind of online threats. You can try the free trial version before buying the complete antivirus suite.
 Vipre Antivirus
 This is one of the top antivirus software that ensures the protection of your PC but wont slow it down. The 2014 version of the antivirus software is an all-in-one security solution to protect your PC from any kind of online threats. The always-on feature of the software scans and protects your PC from real-time threats.
 LavaSoft Security
 The Ad-Aware Pro Security suite from LavaSoft is one of the most comprehensive and all-in-one security suite that any system should have. This security suite offers a complete line of defense mechanism that protects your PC from any kind of extreme malware and other cyber threats. This suite offers the most advanced kind of defense.
 TrustPort Antivirus
 This is an ideal basic protection antivirus that you can have on your PC in order to protect it from spyware and viruses. The best part of this antivirus is that it gets automatically updated from the online resource and is always ready to stop latest, viruses, Trojans, malware and worms. Try the free trial version today.
 Total Defense Antivirus
 Total Defense antivirus offers the most comprehensive spyware and virus protection for your PC. It has best-in-class rootkit protection as well. The design of this software is based on intuitive interface and it has a central control as well. Its quick scan feature is one of its kind and it is convenient to install in just one click.
 Pareto Logic Antivirus
 The antivirus software from Pareto Logic is a trusted name in the field of security of PCs across the world. Its defense mechanism against spyware is commendable and the XoftSpy antivirus of this software maker is used by millions of users across the world. This software keeps the malware away from your computer.
 F.Prot Antivirus
 This antivirus is a power antivirus for your Windows PC. This antivirus program is reliable, easy-to-use and does not slow down the performance of your computer. The software offers a subscription for 1 year that you can use for up to 5 computers at a single cost. This antivirus program offers real-time file system protection.
 Zone Alarm Antivirus
 This is an advanced antivirus software that offers advanced real-time protection from malware and updates the program automatically. This program offers advanced two-way firewall protection along with identity protection and Facebook privacy scan. Enhanced Browser Protection is the new feature that is included in the program.
 CyberDefender Antivirus
 The interesting part of this website is that it offers a free diagnosis before you actually buy the antivirus software from the manufacturer. First, diagnose your computer then decide on what is the requirement of security. The manufacturer offers a range of security suites for your PC that you can choose from after running the free diagnose a system on the website.
 ViRobot Antivirus
 This antivirus offers loads of features like anti-spyware, anti-SPAM, network protection, folder protection, and vulnerability analysis along with the antivirus feature. This means it is the one-stop shop for all your security requirements. This program gives you logs and reports with multi-language support from the manufacturer. This is a powerful antivirus program that you should have.
 In this article, we had a rundown of some of the important and useful antivirus programs that offer great protection to your PC and other devices. All of them offer the basic antivirus feature along with few additional features to protect your computer. As there are a lot of choices in the market today in this segment, it sometimes becomes difficult to make a choice. However, if you are clear about your requirement and the level of protection you need, it would be easy for you to make the right choice. Every day, new and advanced features are getting added to the existing anti-virus software that makes it more powerful in protecting your computer and your identity.
 Updated On Oct 2016: Made changes per user comments and latest software added. 