At Canyon State Credit Union, the security of your accounts and personal information is our highest priority. We make sure we keep your information safe  find out about the extra measures we take for our members security:
 Canyon State Credit Union Online Security Policy
 How to Protect Yourself
 We want our members to be armed with the latest information about security threats, so you can be proactive in keeping your information safe. Our Education Center is also full of great articles and tips to protect yourself from scams, identity theft and other security threats:
 The Latest Scams & Security Threats
 Online Fraud & How to Stay Safe
 Smishing - Text Message Fraud
 Traditional Fraud & How to Stay Safe
 Online Security Tips
 Identity Theft & Protecting Yourself
 Reporting Identity Theft or Fraud
 Holiday Fraud Prevention Tips
 Online Security Videos
 Phishing: Dont take the bait!
 Learn about phishing scams and how to protect your information from getting hooked.
 Identity Theft: Protect Yourself
 Find out how identity thieves steal your information and what you can do to protect it.
 Fraud: If It Sounds Too Good to Be True, It Probably Is
 Learn about common internet fraud scams and how to defend against them.
 Social Media: Be Careful Who You Trust
 We all use social media these days, but you have to be cautious with what you share on social media sites.
 Play it Safe with Portable Devices
 With all the latest technology and gadgets out there, this is one more area to keep secure.
 Reprinted with permission  Intuit Inc. All rights reserved.
 Additional Resources
 Here are some great outside resources that can help you stay informed, too:
 Important: Canyon State Credit Union does not call or email members requesting personal information such as account numbers, PINs, credit card numbers or social security numbers.
 If you are ever contacted by an entity claiming to be from Canyon State Credit Union soliciting this type of information, do not respond and contact us immediately at 623.580.6000 or 800.224.3330 or email us at memberservice@canyonstatecu.org. 