Jerome K. Jerome.Jerome was born in Caldmore, Walsall, England, where he is honoured in a display at Walsall Museum, and was brought up in poverty in London.Other works include the essay collections "Idle Thoughts of an Idle Fellow" and "Second Thoughts of an Idle Fellow"; "Three Men on the Bummel", a sequel to "Three Men in a Boat"; and several other novels.Early life.The young Jerome wished to go into politics or be a man of letters, but the death of both his parents in 1872, when he was 13 years old, forced him to quit his studies and find work to support himself. He was employed at the London and North Western Railway, initially collecting coal that fell along the railway, and remained there for four years.Acting career and early literary works."Three Men in a Boat" and later career.Jerome sat down to write "Three Men in a Boat" as soon as the couple returned from their honeymoon. In the novel, his wife was replaced by his longtime friends George Wingrave (George) and Carl Hentschel (Harris). This allowed him to create comic (and non-sentimental) situations which were nonetheless intertwined with the history of the Thames region. The book, published in 1889, became an instant success and is still in print. Its popularity was such that the number of registered Thames boats went up fifty percent in the year following its publication, and it contributed significantly to the Thames becoming a tourist attraction. In its first twenty years alone, the book sold over a million copies worldwide. It has been adapted to movies, TV and radio shows, stage plays, and even a musical. Its writing style influenced many humorists and satirists in England and elsewhere. Its endurance can probably be attributed to the style and choice of a relatively unchanged location, which ensures that the basic setting remains relevant, even as other things change.With the financial security the sales of the book provided, Jerome was able to dedicate all of his time to writing. He wrote a number of plays, essays and novels, but was never able to recapture the success of "Three Men in a Boat". In 1892 he was chosen by Robert Barr to edit "The Idler" (over Rudyard Kipling). The magazine was an illustrated satirical monthly catering to gentlemen (who, following the theme of the publication, appreciated idleness). In 1893 he founded "To-Day", but had to withdraw from both publications because of financial difficulties and a libel suit.In 1898, a short stay in Germany inspired "Three Men on the Bummel", the sequel to "Three Men in a Boat". While reintroducing the same characters in the setting of a foreign bicycle tour, the book was nonetheless unable to capture the life-force and historic roots of its predecessor, and it enjoyed only a mild success. In 1902 he published the novel "Paul Kelver", which is widely regarded as autobiographical. His 1908 play "The Passing of the Third Floor Back" introduced a more sombre and religious Jerome. This was a tremendous commercial success but was condemned by critics - Max Beerbohm described it as "vilely stupid" and as written by a "tenth-rate writer".World War I and last years.Jerome volunteered to serve his country at the outbreak of the war, but, being 56 years old, was rejected by the British Army. Eager to serve in some capacity, he volunteered as an ambulance driver for the French Army. The war experience was said to have dampened his spirit, as did the death in 1921 of his stepdaughter, Elsie.In 1926, Jerome published his autobiography, "My Life and Times". Shortly afterwards, the Borough of Walsall conferred on him the title Freeman of the Borough. During these last years, Jerome spent more time at his farmhouse in Ewelme near Wallingford.In June 1927, on a motoring tour from Devon to London via Cheltenham and Northampton, Jerome suffered a paralytic stroke and a cerebral haemorrhage. He lay in Northampton General Hospital for two weeks before succumbing on 14 June. He was cremated at Golders Green and his ashes buried at St Mary's Church, Ewelme, Oxfordshire. Elsie, Ettie, and his sister Blandina are buried beside him. A museum dedicated to his life and works now exists at his birth home in Walsall.


