Critical psychology.Critical psychology is a branch of psychology that takes a critical theory based perspective. Critical psychology is aimed at critiquing mainstream psychology and which attempts to apply psychology in more progressive ways, often looking towards social change as a means of preventing and treating psychopathology.One of Critical Psychology's main criticisms of conventional psychology is how it fails to consider or deliberately ignores the way power differences between social classes and groups can impact the mental and physical well-being of individuals or groups of people.Origins.Klaus Holzkamp.One of the most important and sophisticated books in the field is the "Grundlegung der Psychologie" ("Foundations of Psychology") by Klaus Holzkamp, who might be considered the theoretical founder of critical psychology. Holzkamp, who had written 2 books on theory of science and one on sensory perception before publishing the "Grundlegung der Psychologie" in 1983, thought this major work provided a solid paradigm for psychological research, as he viewed psychology as a pre-paradigmatic scientific discipline (T.S. Kuhn had used the term "pre-paradigmatic" for social science).One core result of Holzkamp's historical and comparative analysis of human reproductive action, perception and cognition is a very specific concept of meaning that identifies symbolical meaning as historically and culturally constructed, purposeful conceptual structures that humans create in close relationship to material culture and within the context of historically specific formations of social reproduction.Coming from this phenomenological perspective on culturally mediated and socially situated action, Holzkamp launched a devastating and original methodological attack on behaviorism (which he termed S-R (stimulus-response) psychology) based on linguistic analysis, showing in minute detail the rhetorical patterns by which this approach to psychology creates the illusion of "scientific objectivity" while at the same time losing relevance for understanding culturally situated, intentional human actions. Against this approach, he developed his own approach to generalization and objectivity, drawing on ideas from Kurt Lewin in Chapter 9 of "Grundlegung der Psychologie".His last major publication before his death in 1995 was about learning. It appeared in 1993 and contained a phenomenological theory of learning from the standpoint of the subject. One important concept Holzkamp developed was "reinterpretation" of theories developed by conventional psychology. This meant to look at these concepts from the standpoint of the paradigm of critical psychology, thereby integrating their useful insights into critical psychology while at the same time identifying and criticizing their limiting implications while (which in the case of S-R-psychology were the rhetorical elimination of the subject and intentional action, and in the case of cognitive psychology which did take into account subjective motives and intentional actions, methodological individualism). The first part of the book thus contains an extensive look at the history of psychological theories of learning and a minute re-interpretation of those concepts from the perspective of the paradigm of critical psychology, which focuses on intentional action situated in specific socio-historical/cultural contexts. The conceptions of learning he found most useful in his own detailed analysis of "classroom learning" came from cognitive anthropologists Jean Lave (situated learning) and Edwin Hutchins (distributed cognition). The book's second part contained an extensive analysis on the modern state's institutionalized forms of "classroom learning" as the cultural-historical context that shapes much of modern learning and socialization. In this analysis, he heavily drew upon Michel Foucault's "Discipline and Punish". Holzkamp felt that classroom learning as the historically specific form of learning does not make full use of student's potentials, but rather limits her or his learning potentials by a number of "teaching strategies." Part of his motivation for the book was to look for alternative forms of learning that made use of the enormous potential of the human psyche in more fruitful ways. Consequently, in the last section of the book, Holzkamp discusses forms of "expansive learning" that seem to avoid the limitations of classroom learning, such as apprenticeship and learning in contexts other than classrooms.This search culminated in plans to write a major work on life leadership in the specific historical context of modern (capitalist) society. Due to his death in 1995, this work never got past the stage of early (and premature) conceptualizations, some of which were published in the journals "Forum Kritische Psychologie" and "Argument".1960 through 1970.In the 1960s and 1970s the term "radical psychology" was used by psychologists to denote a branch of the field which rejected conventional psychology's focus on the individual as the basic unit of analysis and sole source of psychopathology. Instead, radical psychologists examined the role of society in causing and treating problems and looked towards social change as an alternative to therapy to treat mental illness and as a means of preventing psychopathology. Within psychiatry the term "anti-psychiatry" was often used and now British activists prefer the term "critical psychiatry". "Critical Psychology" is currently the preferred term for the discipline of psychology keen to find alternatives to the way the discipline of psychology reduces human experience to the level of the individual and thereby strips away possibilities for radical social change.In the 1990s.Starting in the 1990s a new wave of books started to appear on critical psychology, the most influential being the edited book "Critical Psychology" by Dennis Fox and Isaac Prilleltensky. Various introductory texts to critical psychology written in the United Kingdom have tended to focus on discourse, but this has been seen by some proponents of critical psychology as a reduction of human experience to language which is as politically dangerous as the way mainstream psychology reduces experience to the individual mind.Critical Psychology today.There are a few international journals devoted to critical psychology, including the International Journal of Critical Psychology (no longer published) and the Annual Review of Critical Psychology. The journals still tend to be directed to an academic audience, though the Annual Review of Critical Psychology runs as an open-access online journal. There are close links between critical psychologists and critical psychiatrists in Britain through the. Critical psychology courses and research concentrations are available at, the, the and the and the University of AucklandCriticisms of conventional psychology.One of the criticisms of conventional psychology raised by critical psychology is the inattention to power differentials between different groups - examples include between psychiatrists and patients, psychologists and clients, wealthy groups and the less financially well-off, or industrial lobbyists and the general public. This inattention to power has resulted in conventional psychology tending to assume that how things are is how they should be, that the current state of affairs is the natural state of things. As a result, conventional psychology has a tendency to uphold the status quo, blame the victim, and situate problems within individuals rather than the social context they are embedded in.Extensions.Like many critical applications, critical psychology has expanded beyond Marxist roots to benefit from other critical approaches. Consider ecopsychology and transpersonal psychology. Critical psychology and related work has also sometimes been labelled radical psychology and liberation psychology. In the field of developmental psychology, the work of Erica Burman has been influential.Various sub-disciplines within psychology have begun to establish their own critical orientations. Perhaps the most extensive are Critical Health Psychology and Community Psychology.Germany.At FU-Berlin, critical psychology was not really seen as a division of psychology and followed its own methodology, trying to reformulate traditional psychology on an unorthodox Marxist base and drawing from Soviet ideas of cultural-historical psychology, particularly Aleksey Leontyev. Some years ago the department of critical psychology at the FU-Berlin was merged into the traditional psychology department.An (edited by Desmond Painter, Athanasios Marvakis, and Leendert Mos) is devoted to an examination of German Critical Psychology.South Africa.The University of KwaZulu-Natal in Durban, South Africa, is one of few worldwide to offer a. For an overview of critical psychology in South Africa, see Desmond Painter and Martin Terre Blanche's article on. They have also now started a.United States and Canada.Critical psychology in the United States and Canada has, for the most part, focused on critiques of mainstream psychology's support for an unjust "status quo". No departments of critical psychology exist, though critical perspectives are sometimes encountered in traditional universities, perhaps especially within. North American efforts include the 1993 founding of RadPsyNet, the 1997 publication of (edited by Dennis Fox and Isaac Prilleltensky), and the action-focused (Psychologists Acting with Conscience Together).


