Divergence.In vector calculus, divergence is an operator that measures the magnitude of a vector field's source or sink at a given point, in terms of a signed scalar. More technically, the divergence represents the volume density of the outward flux of a vector field from an infinitesimal volume around a given point. For example, consider air as it is heated or cooled. The relevant vector field for this example is the velocity of the moving air at a point. If air is heated in a region it will expand in all directions such that the velocity field points outward from that region. Therefore the divergence of the velocity field in that region would have a positive value, as the region is a source. If the air cools and contracts, the divergence is negative and the region is called a sink.Definition of divergence.More rigorously, the divergence is defined as derivative of the net flow of the vector field across the surface of a small region relative to the volume of that region.where "V" is the volume of an arbitrary shaped region in R3 that includes the point p, "S"("V") is the surface of that volume, and the integral is a surface integral with n being the outward normal to that surface. The result, div F, is a function of the location p. From this definition it also becomes explicitly visible that div F can be seen as the "source density" of the flux of F.The intuition that the sum of all sources minus the sum of all sinks should give the net flow outwards of a region is made precise by the divergence theorem.Application in Cartesian coordinates.Although expressed in terms of coordinates, the result is invariant under orthogonal transformations, as the physical interpretation suggests.Decomposition theorem.For the irrotational part one hasThis "decomposition theorem" is in fact a by-product of the stationary case of electrodynamics. It is a special case of the more general Helmholtz decomposition which works in dimensions greater than three as well.Properties.The following properties can all be derived from the ordinary differentiation rules of calculus. Most importantly, the divergence is a linear operator, i.e.for all vector fields F and G and all real numbers "a" and "b".There is a product rule of the following type: if formula_7 is a scalar valued function and F is a vector field, thenThe Laplacian of a scalar field is the divergence of the field's gradient.(where the first map is the gradient, the second is the curl, the third is the divergence) serves as a nice quantification of the complicatedness of the underlying region "U". These are the beginnings and main motivations of de Rham cohomology.Relation with the exterior derivative.One can establish a parallel between the divergence and a particular case of the exterior derivative, when it takes a 2-form to a 3-form in R3.its exterior derivative formula_18 is given byGeneralizations.The divergence of a vector field can be defined in any number of dimensions. Ifin a Euclidean coordinate system where formula_21 and formula_22, defineThe appropriate expression is more complicated in curvilinear coordinates.For any "n", the divergence is a linear operator, and it satisfies the "product rule"for any scalar-valued function formula_25.The divergence can be defined on any manifold of dimension "n" with a volume form (or density) formula_26 e.g. a Riemannian or Lorentzian manifold. Generalising the construction of a two form for a vectorfield on formula_27, on such a manifold a vectorfield "X" defines a "n-1" form formula_28 obtained by contracting "X" with formula_26. The divergence is then the function defined byStandard formulas for the Lie derivative allow us to reformulate this asThis means that the divergence measures the rate of expansion of a volume element as we let itOn a Riemannian or Lorentzian manifold the divergence with respect to the metric volume formcan be computed in terms of the Levi Civita connection formula_32where the second expression is the contraction of the vectorfield valued 1 -form formula_34 with itself and the last expression is the traditional coordinate expression used by physicists.Divergence can also be generalised to tensors. In Einstein notation, the divergence of a contravariant vector formula_35 is given bywhere formula_37 is the covariant derivative.


