Miami Dolphins.The Miami Dolphins are a professional football team based in the Miami, Florida metropolitan area. They play home games at Sun Life Stadium, in the suburb of Miami Gardens. They are headquartered at the Miami Dolphins Training Facility in Davie, Florida. The Dolphins belong to the Eastern Division of the American Football Conference (AFC) in the National Football League (NFL). The Dolphins were founded by Joseph Robbie, and began play in the American Football League as an expansion team in 1966, an example of that seminal league's expanding the sport to areas that were not then represented. Miami joined the NFL as part of the AFL-NFL merger. The Dolphins are the oldest continuous major-league professional sports franchise in the state of Florida. (The first Florida sports franchise was the Miami Seahawks of the AAFC in 1946.)The team made its first Super Bowl appearance following the 1971 season in Super Bowl VI, but lost to the Dallas Cowboys. In 1972, the Dolphins completed the NFL's first and only perfect season culminating in a Super Bowl win, winning all 14 regular season games, two playoff games and Super Bowl VII. The achievement became the fourth pro football team to accomplish the feat along with the 1937 Los Angeles Bulldogs (16-0-0, AFL), the 1948 Calgary Stampeders (14-0-0, CFL) and the 1948 Cleveland Browns (15-0-0, AAFC).The 1972 Dolphins held the fourth perfect regular season in NFL history, but the other three teams were beaten in the NFL Championship game. The team also won Super Bowl VIII, becoming the first team to appear in three consecutive Super Bowls, and the second team (first AFL/AFC team) to win back-to-back championships. Miami also appeared in Super Bowl XVII and Super Bowl XIX, losing both games.For most of their history, the Dolphins were coached by Don Shula, the most successful head coach in professional football history. His Dolphins teams posted losing records in only two of his 26 seasons with the club. Six future Hall of Fame members played for Miami during the 1970s, including running back Larry Csonka and quarterback Bob Griese. During the 1980s and 1990s quarterback Dan Marino became the most prolific passer in NFL history, breaking numerous league passing records. He led the Dolphins to five division titles, 10 playoff appearances and Super Bowl XIX before retiring after the 1999 season.History.Miami joined the American Football League (AFL) when an expansion team franchise and was awarded to lawyer Joseph Robbie and actor Danny Thomas in 1965 for $7.5 million dollars, although Thomas would eventually sell his stake in the team to Robbie. A contest was held in 1965 to find the name of the new Miami franchise for the American Football League. A total of 19,843 entries were submitted with over a thousand different names. A dozen finalists were screened through by a seven-member committee made up of the local media, names considered included the Mariners, Marauders, Mustangs, Missiles, Moons, Sharks, and Suns. The winning name, "Dolphins," was submitted by 622 entrants. Mrs. Robert Swanson of West Miami won lifetime passes to Dolphin games when her nickname entry successfully predicted the winner and score of the 1965 football game between Notre Dame and the University of Miami, a scoreless tie.1970s.Before the 1972 Dolphins, only the Chicago Bears, in 1934 and 1942, had finished an NFL regular season with no losses or ties. The 1934 team lost the NFL Championship Game that year to the New York Football Giants, and the 1942 team lost the Championship to the Redskins. The Cleveland Browns were undefeated in the 1948 All-America Football Conference season.1980s.Killer B's.1992.1995.Miami had a solid 10-6 season in 1998 with a career season for receiver O.J. McDuffie, but it was not enough to get past the New York Jets into first place in the division. The Dolphins beat the Bills in the Wild Card round, but lost in the next round to the eventual champion Denver Broncos. (The Broncos lost only two regular season games in 1998, one of which was to the Dolphins.)1999.In 1999, the team advanced to the playoffs at 9-7. After a close win at Seattle in the Wild Card round 20-17, they suffered the second worst playoff loss in NFL history against the Jacksonville Jaguars: 62-7. Noteworthy, in the 1940 NFL Championship game, the Chicago Bears beat the host Washington Redskins 73-0 for the worst playoff game in history. After the season, Jimmy Johnson left the team and Marino retired.2002.2003.2004.On January 3, 2007, Saban announced that he had accepted a contract for eight years and a guaranteed $32 million to coach at the University of Alabama. Saban left despite making several public statements in the preceding weeks assuring fans and owner Wayne Huizenga that he would be staying on as coach of the Dolphins. Cam Cameron, previously the offensive coordinator for the San Diego Chargers, was then introduced as the new head coach of the Dolphins.2007.The Dolphins began their season with Trent Green as their starting quarterback but after four games, Green was put on the injured reserve. For the rest of the way, the Dolphins went with Cleo Lemon and rookie John Beck as their quarterbacks. The Dolphins also suffered another setback with then NFL leading rusher Ronnie Brown went down for the season with a knee injury.2008.Late in the 2007 season, two-time Super Bowl winning coach Bill Parcells was named Executive Vice President of the Dolphins football operations. Shortly after the season finale, Parcells fired general manager Randy Mueller and on January 3, 2008, head coach Cam Cameron was fired along with almost all of his staff. That same offseason, the Dolphins also parted ways with two Pro Bowlers and long-time Dolphins, releasing linebacker Zach Thomas (who later signed with the Dallas Cowboys) and trading defensive end Jason Taylor to the Washington Redskins for a second round draft pick.Parcells then proceeded to hire Tony Sparano, who was previously an assistant under Parcells during his days as the head coach of the Dallas Cowboys. The Dolphins ultimately took Jake Long, star offensive lineman out of the University of Michigan with the first pick of the 2008 draft and drafted quarterback Chad Henne with their second round pick (the second consecutive year they drafted a QB in the second round). After the New York Jets traded for Brett Favre and released quarterback Chad Pennington the same day, the Dolphins quickly signed Pennington, who was a former Parcells draft pick.2009.On March 25, 2009 ESPN reporter Chris Mortensen reported that the Dolphins intend to have Chad Henne as the starting quarterback by the 2010 season. That leaves current starting quarterback Chad Pennington's future with the team in doubt after the 2009 season. Henne will receive at least 12 quarters of play in the 2009 preseason to prepare him for the 2010 season.Stadiums.The Dolphins originally played at all of their home games in the Orange Bowl in Miami, Florida. After the 1986 season, they moved to Joe Robbie Stadium. Later the stadium's name was changed to Pro Player Stadium, Dolphins Stadium, Dolphin Stadium, LandShark Stadium, and, as of January 2010, Sun Life Stadium. The facility is located in Miami Gardens, a suburb of Miami located approximately fifteen miles north of downtown Miami.Training.According to a local newspaper, St. Petersburg Beach hosted the Dolphins very first training camp in 1966. The players were housed next to Sea World.The Dolphins trained at Biscayne College, later renamed St. Thomas University, from 1970 until 1993.In 1993, the Dolphins opened the Miami Dolphins Training Facility at Nova Southeastern University in Davie, Florida. In 2006, the facility added a domed field which allows the team to practice during thunderstorms which are frequent during summer training camps.Logos and uniforms.The Dolphins logo and uniforms have remained essentially the same since the team's founding. The team's colors are aqua and orange; navy was added as a trim color in 1997. The logo consists of a flaming hoop (or, sunburst) with a leaping dolphin wearing a football helmet bearing the letter M. At their debut in 1966, the dolphin's head was near the center of the sunburst. By 1974, the dolphin's body was centered on the sunburst. The most substantial revision took place in 1997: the sunburst was simplified and the dolphin was darkened and given a more serious game-face expression.The uniform features white helmets with either white or aqua jerseys and either white or aqua pants. The pants are composed of a high grade cotton/lycra polymer. The most substantial revisions took place in 1997. Navy was introduced as a trim color. The logo was reworked to make the dolphin appear proportionally larger and more three-dimensional in effect. The hashmarks around the perimeters of the logo's sunburst were removed. Navy drop shadows were added to the uniform numbers. The new road uniform featured aqua rather than white pants. The Dolphins made a cameo appearance in.For much of their history the Dolphins have worn their white jerseys at home for daytime games, thus forcing their opponents to suffer in their darker jerseys in the humid weather that is typical of South Florida for most of the year. The aqua home jerseys are typically worn for night games. The Dolphins began this tradition during the perfect season of 1972 and have continued it ever since. Aqua jerseys are also sometimes worn for road games against the other two teams known for wear San Diego Chargers, or other teams who choose to wear white at home in the early season. Miami and Dallas are the only NFL teams that wear white jerseys throughout the season. Washington only wears white for the first half of the season.In 2003 the Dolphins introduced an alternate orange jersey worn once each season for home night contests in 2003 and 2004. They recorded wins both times, against Washington in 2003 and New England in 2004. The alternate jersey was worn again on Monday Night Football against the New York Jets on October 12, 2009.The Dolphins also won this game, 31-27.On three occasions the Dolphins have worn an all-aqua combination for prime-time games: a win over the Chicago Bears in 2002, a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles in 2003, and a win over the Cleveland Browns in 2004.For 2008 the navy blue drop shadow on the uniform numbers were thinned in order to make them easier to read. Despite rumors, the Dolphins have no plans to change the logo.Fight song.The Dolphins fight song is played once at every home game at the end of the third quarter. The song was written and composed by Lee Ofman. Ofman approached the Dolphins with it before the 1972 season because he wanted music to inspire his favorite team. The fight song would soon serve as a good luck charm for the Dolphins that season. The Dolphins became the first team in NFL history to record an undefeated season, going 17-0 en route to victory over the Washington Redskins in Super Bowl VII. The following season, Miami posted an equally impressive 15-2 record, and capped the season with another title, defeating the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl VIII. The back-to-back championship runs, coupled with the popularity of the fight song amongst Dolphins fans, have ensured the song's longevity. The Dolphins revealed a new fight song by T-Pain & Jimmy Buffett featuring Pitbull on August 7, 2009 which will be introduced for the '09/10 NFL season. The fight song was played during the preseason home opener against the Jacksonville Jaguars on August 17, 2009, but was not played during the second preseason game against the Carolina Panthers on August 22, 2009 after being booed heavily in the first game. Furthermore, the team has preferred to play Buffett's song "Fins" after scores during the 2009 regular season instead of the traditional fight song. The Dolphins shorthand nickname, "The Fins," has been recognized and used by the team.Cheerleaders.The team's cheerleaders are known collectively as the Miami Dolphins Cheerleaders. The company had its debut in 1978 as the Dolphins Starbrites. (The name referred to the co-sponsor, Starbrite Car Polish.) The cheerleaders' founding choreographer was June Taylor, famed colleague of Jackie Gleason, who led the squad until her retirement in 1990.The Dolphin Dolls, a 125-member pep squad of girls aged 8 to 18, cheered the team at home games from 1966 to 1977.T.D..On Friday, April 18, 1997, the first "official" mascot of the Miami Dolphins was introduced. The 7 foot mascot made his public debut on April 19 at Pro Player Stadium during the team's draft day party. The team then made a "Name the Mascot" contest that drew over 13,000 enteries covering all 50 states and 22 countries. 529 names were suggested. The winning entry, was announced at the annual Dolphins Awards Banquet on June 4, 1997.Dolfan Denny.Flipper.From 1966 to 1968 a live dolphin who was situated in a fish tank in the open (east) end of the Orange Bowl. He would jump in the tank and celebrate touchdowns and field goals. Flipper was removed from the Orange Bowl after 1968 in order to save costs. In "Ace Ventura", a live dolphin who did tricks after the Dolphins scored a touchdown named Snowflake was the basis of the film after he is kidnapped as part of a revenge plot against Dan Marino.Pro Football Hall of Famers.Each of these players is honored with a placard on the facing of the upper level of one end zone at Sun Life Stadium. So is team founder-owner Joe Robbie, who has not yet been elected to the Hall of Fame. In place of a uniform number, Shula has the number 347, representing his record number of NFL coaching victories, 274 of them as Dolphins head coach.


